
The acsint device driver
			---------------------
			Karl Dahlke
			eklhad@gmail.com

The word acsint is shorthand for accessibility intercepter,
since we are going to intercept kernel events and make the linux computer
more accessible to a wide range of disabilities.
The concept was developed by Saqib Shaikh in 2005, but did not
become practical until notifiers came on the scene in kernel 2.6.26.
Before then, many large and complex screen readers,
such as Speakup, were either built into the kernel,
or written as kernel modules that run in kernel space.
This makes it difficult to drive software synthesizers,
which are large and complicated programs that must run in user space.
The advantages of pulling screen readers and other adapters
out of the kernel and back into user space are simply to numerous to mention.
You can probably think of 5 off the top of your head.
The acsint system makes it possible to write an adapter as a user space daemon,
and still adapt the computer at the lowest level.

Acsint is a linear system, passing keystrokes and tty output
to user space through a virtual stream.
In other words, it is well suited to the command line interface.
This does not form the basis for adapting gnome, kde, X,
or any other 2 dimensional screen / graphical presentation.
People are working on adapters for those systems, e.g. Orca for gnome.
Acsint is for the command line interface,
which is (not surprisingly) what I prefer.

Acsint provides low level kernel events which are described below.
However, managing these events is a bit like reading a block device
without a filesystem on top of it.
You can do it, but you probably don't want to.
I have developed a user space library called acsbridge,
which is a layer above this device driver.
Continuing our earlier analogy, this is the filesystem on top of the block device.
The bridge layer gathers events from the driver and maintains a running log
of all tty output.
It tells the driver which keys to capture (dynamic key binding),
and then notifies the adapter, via callback functions,
when those keys are struck.
The operation of the acsint bridge layer is beyond the scope of this document.
I just wanted you to know that a higher level API exists,
and if you are building an adapter, you probably want to use that library,
rather than reading from this driver directly.

This is not just a pencil and paper sketch -
adapters have been written successfully using this system.
In other words, it really works.
I am in such an adapter right now, as I write this file.
It is a user space program, using the acsint bridge layer
to gather events from /dev/acsint.
My adapter lived in the kernel for 10 years,
but I was more than happy to pull it back down to user space.
Little was lost, and much was gained.
For instance, just last week a bug in my software caused a seg fault,
not a kernel panic.
What more can I say?

Acsint is written as a loadable kernel module,
though it could be built into the system.
As a module, it has one parameter, "major",
which is the major number of the resulting device.

modprobe acsint major=11

When called this way, you will want to create /dev/acsint
with major number 11 and minor number 1.

modprobe acsint major=0

If major is set to 0, or left unspecified,
we use misc_register() to instantiate a device dynamically.
The device will have major number 10 and minor number to be determined.
If udev is running on your system, it can create /dev/acsint
for you having the correct major and minor numbers.
Thus your user space adapter can open the device and gain access
to kernel events.

The device offers the functions open, close, read, write, and poll.
In this regard it is much like any other character device.
One could imagine other drivers that offer the same functionality
through these 5 system calls, but that is beyond the scope of this document.
Here is a rough outline of these 5 system calls.

open()

Only one program can open this device at a time.
If the device is already opened, -1 is returned,
with errno set to EBUSY.
Other than that, the open will succeed.
An initial event is placed on the read queue,
to tell the adapter what console it is running on.
See the FGC event below.
Thus, if you read from the device, you will get an event right away.

close()

This closes the device.
The busy flag is cleared, and the next call to open() will succeed.
All internal buffers are cleared, and all variables reinitialized.
There is no memory of accumulated tty output, or key bindings, etc.
Each open starts a brand new session.

poll()

The adapter can poll the device to see if it has any events to read.
This is used by the adapter, or the bridge layer,
to monitor two devices at once, the acsint driver and the speech synthesizer.
(See the select system call.)
The synthesizer could be attach to a serial or usb port,
or a socket, or a pipe - but it is probably accessible via a file descriptor,
which means we want to read from two descriptors simultaneously.
That is done with select(), and that requires a polling function.
You probably don't need to invoke poll() directly -
let select() do the work for you.

write()

This is used by the adapter to configure the driver.
Most commands are 1 2 or 3 bytes long.
The first byte is the action,
and the following bytes are parameters for that action.

char acsint_command[4];
acsint_command[0] = ACS_SOME_ACTION;
acsint_command[1] = some_parameter;
write(acsint_fd, acsint_command, 2);

The driver swallows the command immediately, and acts upon it.
There is no reason this write should fail.
Of course the action, or its parameter, could be invalid for some reason,
but the write() system call still succeeds, and returns 0.

The configuration commands are defined in linux/acsint.h.
The application should include this header file
and use the symbolic constants therein.
The write actions are as follows.

ACS_CLEAR_KEYS

Clear all key bindings.
All keystrokes are passed through to the console.
None are intercepted for the adapter.

ACS_SET_KEY

The parameters are the key code and the shift state.
thus this is a 3 byte command.
Key codes can be found in linux/input.h, which is included by acsint.h.
If you issue this command with KEY_F1 and ACS_SS_CTRL, then control F1
is intercepted and passed back to your adapter
via the read() system call described below.
It does not become input for the foreground tty.
You can put states together to capture key chords.
For instance, ACS_SS_LALT|ACS_SS_CTRL will capture
the key when modified by the left alt and the control keys simultaneously.
Any combinations not specifically intercepted will pass through to the console.

ACS_UNSET_KEY

The parameters are the key code and the shift state.
This reverses the action of ACS_SET_KEY above.
The key, with the specified modifiers, is no longer intercepted,
and will pass through to the console.

ACS_ISMETA

This takes the key code,
and 1 or 0, enabled or disabled.
If enabled, the key is a meta key, like shift or alt etc.
It always passes through to the console.
For example, Speakup uses the insert key to modify other keys.
To simulate this, use loadkeys to make insert the same as right alt,
then call this function to tell the driver that insert is a meta key,
and should always be passed through.
		acs_ismeta(KEY_INSERT, 1);
You can then bind various speech functions to right alt keys,
and use the insert key for right alt.

ACS_PUSH_TTY

This function passes a string from user space back to the kernel,
as though it had been typed at the keyboard.
an adapter typically generates input for two reasons.
1. A key can be a macro for a commonly used string,
something that you don't want to type over and over again.
2. A key can be bound to a string dynamically to support cut&paste.
Mark the start and end of a string in the buffer, grab it,
then inject it into the input stream of this console or another console.
(I typically cut&paste between two consoles.)

The command consists of the action code and the low and high bytes of an unsigned short.
Thus ACS_PUSH_TTY 2 1 is pushing a string of length 258.
The next 258 bytes form the string.
The string can be utf8 to push international text into the console.

ACS_BYPASS

The driver will pass the next keystroke through to the console,
even if it would normally be intercepted.
If control C is bound to a speech function,
but you want to pass control C through to the console to interrupt a
running program, then you need this function.

In theory there is a race condition here;
the adapter could be swapped out, and you might type the next key
before the BYPASS event was registered;
but in practice this will never happen.
On today's ghz processors, the time between one keystroke and the next
is an eternity.  Still, for this reason and for others,
you may want to lock your adapter in core and give it a high priority.
Speech commands should respond instantly, even if the system is under load.

ACS_DIVERT

This takes the parameter 1 or 0, enabled or disabled.
If enabled, all keystrokes are intercepted.
Use this to type a short message directly into your adapter.
For instance, type a search string into the adapter,
then locate that text within the tty buffer.
Don't forget to turn DIVERT off once the text has been entered,
to resume normal operations.

ACS_MONITOR

This takes the parameter 1 or 0, enabled or disabled.
If enabled, keystrokes that are destined for the console
are also passed back to the adapter.
Think of this as /usr/bin/tee.
This could be used to echo keystrokes as they are typed,
but in practice it is better to echo the characters as they appear on screen.
Thus passwords are not echoed for the world to hear, etc.
Most adapters do not use this function for echo.
(See the MORECHARS event below.)
Still, you may want to monitor keystrokes
for some other reason that I haven't anticipated,
and this function makes it possible.

ACS_SOUNDS

Acsint is capable of generating diagnostic clicks and chirps through
the inbuilt toggle speaker at port 0x61.
This is particularly helpful if speech is not working for any reason.
Even if everything is operational, the clicks tell the user when the computer
is generating output, and the nature of that output, before the synthesizer
has spoken a word.  Most people find this audio feedback helpful.

This function turns sounds on and off.
If you are working in the middle of the night in a small dorm room,
and your roommate is trying to sleep,
well, you probably want to turn all sounds off.
The one byte parameter is 1 or 0, for sounds enabled or disabled.

Sounds are produced by the module ttyclicks.c.
If depmod has been run, modprobe should load ttyclicks before it loads acsint.
The ttyclicks module has some features that are not accessible
through the acsint driver.  They are not described here.
See ttyclicks.txt for more details.
For our purposes we can pretend like acsint is generating the sounds itself.

ACS_SOUNDS_TTY

This takes the parameter 1 or 0, enabled or disabled.
If enabled, then tty output produces clicks for printable characters,
pauses for spaces, and a special swoop for newline.
Blank lines, text, C code, columated data - all have distinct audio signatures.
This does not pass any events back to user space, it simply generates
clicks as characters pass through the tty and onto the screen.

Note that sounds must be enabled overall, via ACS_SOUNDS, for this to work.
SOUNDS is a master switch that turns all other sounds on or off.

ACS_SOUNDS_KMSG

This takes the parameter 1 or 0, enabled or disabled.
If enabled, then printk messages produce a special,
some would say irritating, sequence of tones.
This is like an alarm for a blind person.
"Hey, the kernel just printed an error message, you might want to read it."

ACS_CLICK

The driver clicks the speaker,
as though a single character had appeared on screen.
If the adapter accepts a hot key, and performs a function accordingly,
a soft click can provide helpful audio feedback.
"Yes I caught your keystroke, and all is well."
Or you may want to issue several clicks in succession
to convey some information to the user.
Perhaps a sound like static, indicating a bad serial connection,
and thus no speech.

ACS_CR

Generate the swoop that is associated with the newline character.
(This was orriginally tied to cr, not lf,
so is called acs_cr for historical reasons.)
You may want to issue this sound when the user hits enter to complete
a command that is directed towards the adapter rather than standard input.
Or it can be used to indicate success.
I use it when reading through text, because I would rather hear
a quick swoop than the word "new line".
I have an implicit understanding of where the lines break as I listen to the words.

ACS_SWOOP

Issue a frequency sweep from one level to another,
either ascending or descending.
The first byte is an unsigned char, and is multiplied by 10 to give
the starting period.
The second byte is multiplied by ten for the ending period.
The third byte is a signed char, and represents the step.
The function does this:

for(period=start; period </> end; period += step) {
	udelay(period);
	toggle the speaker;
}

The ACS_CR function is shorthand for
ACS_SWOOP 26 6 -2

ACS_NOTES

This command plays a series of notes, a song if you will.
The notes are of course square waves, and not terribly melodic.
The driver queuees up at most 10 notes to play; subsequent notes are discarded.

The first parameter is a single byte indicating the number of notes.

Each note is defined by three bytes.
The first two bytes build a short, which is the frequency in hurtz.
A frequency of -1 is a rest.
The third byte is the duration in hundredths of a second.
The standard control G bell, 1Khz for a tenth of a second, looks like:
ACS_NOTES 1 232 3 10

ACS_REFRESH

This is the last write command, and it has no parameters.
It is a request to bring the tty buffer in user space up to date.
Let me clarify by describing the internals of the driver.

In an early version of this driver, which was quickly shelved,
each tty character generated an event.
Cat a megabyte file, and millions of events passed through
acsint and down to user space.
If there was even a modest load on the system, the adapter could not keep up.
Events were lost, and the adapter did not have an accurate
representation of the characters on the screen.
A new approach was needed.

acsint maintains a circular buffer of size 50K for each virtual console.
These buffers are allocated as needed.
After all, 63 consoles are possible, but most systems only use 6.
Tty output is placed at the head of the buffer, and if the buffer is full
the oldest characters drop off the tail.
Your adapter should maintain a 50K buffer for each active console,
which will act as a mirror for the buffers in kernel space.
The refresh command asks the driver to pass down any new output characters
that have not been  seen before.
These characters are transferred in one system call,
and thus your read buffer should be at least 50K.
(The actual size is a symbolic constant in acsint.h.)
Once these characters are passed to user space, acsint places a mark
at the head of the circular buffer, to remember where it left off.
Issue the refresh command again,
and you will get any new output characters beyond this mark.

What happens if you cat a megabyte file?
The flood of output pushes all the old characters,
and the mark, off the tail of the buffer.
The buffer now contains the last 50K of output.
When you refresh, acsint passes this text down to user space,
and your adapter will push it onto the parallel buffer that
you are maintaining.
Old text is pushed away, just as it was in the kernel,
and you now have the last 50K of output, just like the kernel.
It works, and nothing is lost.
After each refresh you have an accurate snapshot of the output of your console.

Output is passed from the kernel to acsint in the form of unicodes.
This is a natural consequence of the PREWRITE notifier in vt.c.
With this precedent established, I may as well pass the unicodes
down to you, whence your adapter can support any language.
Thus each character is actually 4 bytes wide.
The buffers are not 50K, they are 200K,
and your read buffer should be 200K plus a few hundred bytes for extra events.
As mentioned earlier, the bridge layer handles all this for you,
and makes the text available to you either as unicodes or as downshifted ascii.

ACS_OBREAK

Specify a gap of time, in tenths of a second,
that is sufficient to indicate a new burst of output.
See the MORECHARS event below for more details.

read()

The last system call supported by this device driver is read().
Unlike the write call, each event is 4 byte aligned.
An event will never be 2 or 3 bytes.
Thus, when acsint is ready to pass unicodes down to user space,
as described above, the reading offset is already 4 byte aligned.
Here are the events.

ACS_FGC

This event indicates a new foreground console.
The console number is the only parameter.
Thus this is a 2 byte event.
However, every event is 4 byte aligned,
so you should skip past the next two bytes, and then process the next event.

This command includes an automatic refresh.
If you are switching to console 6, and that console has
generated output that you have not seen,
your buffers will be brought up to date.
In other words, you don't have to issue the refresh command; it is done for you.
Though there is no harm in issuing it again if you like.
The new characters are passed down via the following event.

ACS_TTY_NEWCHARS

The next byte is the minor number of the current console.
This is not needed, since ACS_FGC keeps you up to date.
I guess it is here for historical reasons; you can ignore it.

The next two bytes build an unsigned short,
the number of new characters to be passed down.
If this number is 1000, then the next 1000 unsigned ints,
i.e. the next 4,000 bytes, hold the last thousand unicode values
generated by the tty.

ACS_KEYSTROKE

The user has typed a key that acsint has intercepted.
This is a 4 byte event.
The parameters are the key code, the shift state, and the led state.

Like FGC, this event includes an automatic refresh.
However, the refresh, the new characters that you haven't seen,
come before the keystroke,
whereas they came after the FGC event.
This makes sense if you think about it.
You want to switch consoles, then update the buffer;
whereas you want your buffer to be up to date before you process a key command.

ACS_TTY_MORECHARS

There are more characters that you haven't seen.
An adapter typically responds to this by refreshing the buffer
and then reading the new text.
This is autoread mode, and most adapters run in autoread mode
most of the time.

This is an 8 byte event.
The second byte indicates echo mode, and is 0 1 or 2.
If 0, then the computer has generated output that is not an echo
of your input.
This event is thrown only once, until you refresh the buffer.
Then it will be thrown again when new output is generated, and so on.

If echo = 1 then this character, which is a unicode in the second int,
is an echo of the user's keystroke.
This brings the buffer up to date.
It tells the adapter to speak that character, if it is
configured to echo the user's keystrokes.

If echo = 2 then this is an implied echo.
It is not the same character as the entered keystroke, but is implied by
that keystroke.  The most common example is spaces for tab, as in stty tab3.
You may or may not want to speak these characters in echo mode.

The first variant, with echo = 0, is not thrown
if the new output occurs within a specified gap of time
relative to the prior output.
The driver considers this all the same output,
as it has probably come from the same command.
If you are examining words or letters in the output,
or if you have paused to think about what you are reading, you don't want
autoread to pull you down the page just because output continues to flow.
This driver tries to determine whether a batch of output is new or not,
and the easiest way to do this is by timing.
Note however that any key passed to the console will be treated
as a new command, and the next batch of output will be new output,
and will throw the MORECHARS event.
In other words, timing considerations fly out the window once you start typing.
You can set this gap via ACS_OBREAK.
The default is 5, or half a second.
A gap of 0 turns the timing feature off entirely.

ACS_REFRESH

Finally, the REFRESH event is passed back to you
when you issue the refresh command.
It is the only action code that goes back and forth.
You can treat it as a no-op.
This is done so there is something to read, even if there are no new
characters to pass down.
The adapter can issue the refresh command, and then block read on the device,
and something will be returned.
At that point the adapter's buffer is brought up to date.

That completes the description of the acsint device driver.
As you can see, it is awkward to use,
and one could easily lose data if events are not managed in the proper sequence.
If you are interested in building a user space adapter, I would recommend
working with the acsint bridge layer, which contains approximately 5,000
lines of code that you really don't want to reinvent.

Send any questions to the author
using the email address at the top of this file.
